Add spec for MultiProfile.md (#1654)
MicrosoftEdge/WebView2Feedback: specs/MultiProfile.md

API spec for multiple profile support
===

# Background

Currently, all WebView2s can only use one fixed Edge profile in the browser process, which is
normally the **Default** profile or the profile specified by the **--profile-directory** command
line switch. Regarding this we have got a bunch of requests to support multiple profiles, so we're
adding these new APIs.

With this you can have different WebView2s running with separate profiles under a given user data
directory, which means separate cookies, user preference settings, and various data storage etc.,

> to enable you to build a more wonderful experience for your application.

Reviewer: Previously the end developer could use more than one user data folder to have separate cookies and so on. With profile support you get that but also just one browser process? Is that the goal is reduced memory and CPU footprint from having to support multiple browser processes? Or are there other benefits or goals for this?

Author: Thanks! Added several sentences to make clear of the merit of our multiple profile support.

# Examples

> <!-- TEMPLATE

Reviewer: Missing sample code. This could be the same as the sample code you add to the sample app.

Author: Done.

    }
    ```

    ## SecondFeatureName

    Feature explanation text goes here, including why an app would use it, how it
    replaces or supplements existing functionality.

    ```c#
    void SampleMethod()
    {
        var show = new AnExampleOf();
        show.SomeMembers = AndWhyItMight(be, interesting)
    }
    ```
    
    ```cpp
    void SampleClass::SampleMethod()
    {
        winrt::com_ptr<ICoreWebView2> webview2 = ...
    }
    ```

    As an example of this section, see the Examples section for the Custom Downloads
    APIs (https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/WebView2Feedback/blob/master/specs/CustomDownload.md). 
-->

# API Details

## Win32 C++

```IDL
interface ICoreWebView2Staging6;
interface ICoreWebView2StagingCreateControllerOptions;
interface ICoreWebView2StagingEnvironment4;
interface ICoreWebView2StagingProfile;

[uuid(57FD205C-39D5-4BA1-8E7B-3E53C323EA87), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2StagingEnvironment4 : IUnknown
{
  /// Create a new ICoreWebView2StagingCreateControllerOptions to be passed as a parameter of
  /// CreateCoreWebView2ControllerWithOptions and CreateCoreWebView2CompositionControllerWithOptions.

>   HRESULT CreateCoreWebView2CreateControllerOptions(

Reviewer: Maybe this should just be ControllerOptions instead of CreateControllerOptions (and also ICoreWebView2StagingCreateControllerOptions -> ICoreWebView2StagingControllerOptions). What do you think?
```suggestion
  HRESULT CreateCoreWebView2ControllerOptions(
```

Author: Done. I also think CreateCoreWebView2ControllerOptions is more concise. Later will update our code base accordingly.

  [propget] HRESULT ProfileName([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);
  /// Sets the `ProfileName` property.
  [propput] HRESULT ProfileName([in] LPCWSTR value);

  /// `InPrivateModeEnabled` property is to enable/disable InPrivate mode.
  [propget] HRESULT InPrivateModeEnabled([out, retval] BOOL* enabled);
  /// Sets the `InPrivateModeEnabled` property.
  [propput] HRESULT InPrivateModeEnabled([in] BOOL enabled);
}

[uuid(6E5CE5F0-16E6-4A05-97D8-4E256B3EB609), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2Staging6 : IUnknown {
  /// The associated `ICoreWebView2StagingProfile` object.
  [propget] HRESULT Profile([out, retval] ICoreWebView2StagingProfile** profile);
}

[uuid(3B9A2AF2-E703-4C81-9D25-FCE44312E960), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2StagingProfile : IUnknown {
  /// Name of the profile.
  [propget] HRESULT ProfileName([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

  /// InPrivate mode is enabled or not.
  [propget] HRESULT InPrivateModeEnabled([out, retval] BOOL* enabled);

  /// Full path of the profile directory.
  [propget] HRESULT ProfilePath([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

>   /// TODO: All profile-wide operations/settings will be put below.

Reviewer: /// comments are picked up by our script to generate our reference documentation. Use // for other kinds of comments. 
```suggestion
  // TODO: All profile-wide operations/settings will be put below.
```

}

> ```

Reviewer: You are missing the WinRT MIDL3 version of the interfaces. If you run build-apiwriter.ps1 you can copy paste the MIDL3 out of the generated Microsoft.Web.WebView2.Core.IDL

Author: Done. Thanks much for the hint.

they might also interfere with each other in terms of user preference settings.

Although you can make your WebView2s use different user data directories to achieve data separation,
in such way you'll have to be running multiple browser instances (each including a browser process
and a bunch of child processes), which means much more consumption for system resources including
memory, CPU footprint, disk space etc. so it is not desirable.

With all above, we're adding these new APIs to support multiple profiles, so that you can have
multiple WebView2s running with separate profiles under a single user data directory (i.e. a single
browser instance at runtime), which means separate cookies, user preference settings, and various
data storage etc., to help you build a more wonderful experience for your application.

# Examples

## Provide options to create WebView2 with a specific profile

### Win32 C++

```cpp
HRESULT AppWindow::CreateControllerWithOptions()
{
    auto webViewEnvironment4 =
        m_webViewEnvironment.try_query<ICoreWebView2Environment4>();

    Microsoft::WRL::ComPtr<ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions> options;

>     HRESULT hr = webViewEnvironment4->CreateCoreWebView2ControllerOptions(

Reviewer 2: Done, check webViewEnvironment4 before use it.

        m_webviewOption.profile.c_str(), m_webviewOption.isInPrivate, options.GetAddressOf());

>     if (hr == E_INVALIDARG)

Author: Yes, added a comment "/// Returns E_INVALIDARG only in case of invalid profile name." for CreateCoreWebView2ControllerOptions.

    {

>         ShowFailure(hr, L"Invalid profile name, create WebView failed! Window is closing.");

Reviewer 2: The failure message is changed.

        CloseAppWindow();

>         return S_FALSE;

Author: Done.

>         return S_FALSE;

Reviewer 2: Got it, return S_OK instead.

    
    // Gets the webview object from controller.
    wil::com_ptr<ICoreWebView2> coreWebView2;
    CHECK_FAILURE(m_controller->get_CoreWebView2(&coreWebView2));
    coreWebView2.query_to(&m_webView);
    m_webView3 = coreWebView2.try_query<ICoreWebView2_3>();
    
    // Gets the profile property of webview.
    wil::com_ptr<ICoreWebView2Profile> profile;
    CHECK_FAILURE(m_webView3->get_Profile(&profile));
    
    // Accesses the profile object.
    wil::unique_cotaskmem_string name;
    CHECK_FAILURE(profile->get_ProfileName(&name));
    BOOL inPrivateModeEnabled;
    CHECK_FAILURE(profile->get_InPrivateModeEnablede(&inPrivateModeEnabled));
    wil::unique_cotaskmem_string path;
    CHECK_FAILURE(profile->get_ProfilePath(&path));
    
    // ...
}
```

# API Details

## Win32 C++

```IDL
interface ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions;
interface ICoreWebView2Environment5;
interface ICoreWebView2_7;
interface ICoreWebView2Profile;

[uuid(C2669A3A-03A9-45E9-97EA-03CD55E5DC03), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions : IUnknown {
  /// `ProfileName` property is to specify a profile name, which is only allowed to contain

>   /// the following ASCII characters with the maximum length as 64 and will be treated in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  /// the following ASCII characters. It has a maximum length of 64 characters. It is ASCII case insensitive.
```

>   /// the following ASCII characters with the maximum length as 64 and will be treated in a

Reviewer: Is that 64 characters including the null terminator or excluding the null terminator?

Author: I think normally it should be excluding the null terminator. Will update the comment to make it clear.

  /// case insensitive way.
  ///    alphabet characters: a-z and A-Z
  ///    digit characters: 0-9
  ///    and '#', '@', '$', '(', ')', '+', '-', '_', '~', '.', ' ' (space).
  /// Note: the text must not end with a period '.' or ' ' (space). And, although upper case letters are
  /// allowed, they're treated just as lower case couterparts because the profile name will be mapped to
  /// the real profile directory path on disk and Windows file system handles path names in a case-insensitive way.
  [propget] HRESULT ProfileName([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);
  /// Sets the `ProfileName` property.
  [propput] HRESULT ProfileName([in] LPCWSTR value);

  /// `InPrivateModeEnabled` property is to enable/disable InPrivate mode.

>   [propget] HRESULT InPrivateModeEnabled([out, retval] BOOL* enabled);

Reviewer: To make this consistent with our other Is*Enabled properties, let's add 'Is' to the beginning of the name.

Also, we try to use the parameter name `value` for properties.

```suggestion
  [propget] HRESULT IsInPrivateModeEnabled([out, retval] BOOL* value);
```

  /// Sets the `InPrivateModeEnabled` property.

>   [propput] HRESULT InPrivateModeEnabled([in] BOOL enabled);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [propput] HRESULT IsInPrivateModeEnabled([in] BOOL value);
```

interface ICoreWebView2Environment5 : IUnknown
{
  /// Create a new ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions to be passed as a parameter of
  /// CreateCoreWebView2ControllerWithOptions and CreateCoreWebView2CompositionControllerWithOptions.
  HRESULT CreateCoreWebView2ControllerOptions(
      [in] LPCWSTR profileName,
      [in] BOOL inPrivateModeEnabled,
      [out, retval] ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions** options);

  /// Create a new WebView with options.
  HRESULT CreateCoreWebView2ControllerWithOptions(
      [in] HWND parentWindow,
      [in] ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions* options,
      [in] ICoreWebView2CreateCoreWebView2ControllerCompletedHandler* handler);

  /// Create a new WebView in visual hosting mode with options.
  HRESULT CreateCoreWebView2CompositionControllerWithOptions(
      [in] HWND parentWindow,
      [in] ICoreWebView2ControllerOptions* options,
      [in] ICoreWebView2CreateCoreWebView2CompositionControllerCompletedHandler* handler);
}

[uuid(6E5CE5F0-16E6-4A05-97D8-4E256B3EB609), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2_7 : IUnknown {
  /// The associated `ICoreWebView2Profile` object.

>   [propget] HRESULT Profile([out, retval] ICoreWebView2Profile** profile);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [propget] HRESULT Profile([out, retval] ICoreWebView2Profile** value);
```

}

[uuid(3B9A2AF2-E703-4C81-9D25-FCE44312E960), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2Profile : IUnknown {
  /// Name of the profile.
  [propget] HRESULT ProfileName([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

  /// InPrivate mode is enabled or not.

>   [propget] HRESULT InPrivateModeEnabled([out, retval] BOOL* enabled);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [propget] HRESULT IsInPrivateModeEnabled([out, retval] BOOL* value);
```

  /// Full path of the profile directory.
  [propget] HRESULT ProfilePath([out, retval] LPWSTR* value);

  // TODO: All profile-wide operations/settings will be put below in the future.
}
```

## .NET and WinRT

```c#
namespace Microsoft.Web.WebView2.Core
{
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2ControllerOptions;
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2Environment;
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2;
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2Profile;

    runtimeclass CoreWebView2ControllerOptions
    {        
        String ProfileName { get; set; };

>         Int32 InPrivateModeEnabled { get; set; };

Reviewer: This should be a Boolean not Int32. Renaming this to start with `Is` should hopefully fix this

Author: Yep, making it start with `Is` solved this.

    }
    
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2Environment
    {
        // ...
    
        CoreWebView2ControllerOptions CreateCoreWebView2ControllerOptions(

>             String ProfileName, Int32 InPrivateModeEnabled);

Reviewer: This too should be a Boolean not Int32. Prefixing this with `is` again may make this work better by the tool.

Author: Prefixing this with `is` does not seem to change the `Int32` to `Boolean`. I noticed that the same thing happens for other APIs in Microsoft.Web.WebView2.Core.idl, for instance:

>             CoreWebView2ContextMenuItem CreateContextMenuItem(String Label, String ShortcutKeyDescription, Windows.Storage.Streams.IRandomAccessStream iconStream, CoreWebView2ContextMenuItemKind Kind, Int32 IsEnabled, Int32 IsChecked);

Reviewer: Looks like ContextMenu API changed and no longer has this parameter. Examining WV2Property.cs I realize now that's not enough since the generated code won't know to convert the bool to int32

Author: Done. Changed to use Boolean.

        
        Windows.Foundation.IAsyncOperation<CoreWebView2Controller>
        CreateCoreWebView2ControllerWithOptionsAsync(
            CoreWebView2ControllerWindowReference ParentWindow,
            CoreWebView2ControllerOptions options);
        
        Windows.Foundation.IAsyncOperation<CoreWebView2CompositionController>
        CreateCoreWebView2CompositionControllerWithOptionsAsync(
            CoreWebView2ControllerWindowReference ParentWindow,
            CoreWebView2ControllerOptions options);
    }
    
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2
    {
        // ...
        CoreWebView2Profile Profile { get; };
    }
    
    runtimeclass CoreWebView2Profile
    {

>         String ProfileName { get; };

Reviewer: Do we have a way to know if a profile is the default profile?

Author: If this ProfileName is an empty string, it should be the Default profile unless "--profile-directory=xxx" command line switch is taking effect, in which case it would be the "xxx" profile specified there.

But checking the ProfilePath (the full path of the profile directory on disk) will help to know for sure whether it's the Default profile.

Author: Yeah I feel we might want to gradually remove the support for "--profile-directory=xxx" from now on, as this seems like a workaround in the previous era when we did not have multiple profile support. The only reason we're still keeping it is that we do not want to break some existing users who're potentially relying this workaround to not use the Default profile. Once it's gone, ProfileName being empty will indicate the Default profile for sure and the `IsDefault` will just be completely redundant.

        Int32 InPrivateModeEnabled { get; };

        String ProfilePath { get; };
    }
}
```

# Appendix

> Next we'll consolidate all profile-wide operations/settings into the interface

Reviewer: Do we already know what the APIs should look like to consolidate existing profile-wide operations here and to add a method to erase a profile? Can you please describe the future changes with slightly more detail in this issue?

I just want to make sure that we don't expect those future changes to make us regret the decisions we're making in this document now. We could potentially do a larger API review document that includes those changes if we think those future additions will influence our thoughts on the current APIs. I'm guessing that's not necessary but just to be safe please list the future changes.

Thank you!

Author: Added more details for the future changes. The erase method might need relatively complex implementation, so maybe we do not want to implement it unless strong requests come up. Other methods are supposed to be straightforward.

Reviewer: Thanks! I meant just in the issue here. Please remove the IDL section below from the doc which may be confusing for API reviewers.

Author: Removed from this doc.

The idea for future changes is roughly illustrated as below.

## Win32 C++

```IDL
[uuid(3B9A2AF2-E703-4C81-9D25-FCE44312E960), object, pointer_default(unique)]
interface ICoreWebView2Profile : IUnknown {
  // ...
  
  /// Gets the cookie manager object for this profile.
  /// See ICoreWebView2CookieManager.
  [propget] HRESULT CookieManager([out, retval] ICoreWebView2CookieManager** cookieManager);

  /// Clears browsing data based on a specific data type. The completed handler
  /// will be invoked when the browsing data has been cleared and will indicate
  /// if the specified data was properly cleared.
  HRESULT ClearBrowsingData(
      [in] COREWEBVIEW2_BROWSING_DATA_KIND dataKind,
      [in] ICoreWebView2ClearBrowsingDataCompletedHandler *handler);

  /// Toggles whether autosave for password information is enabled. Disabled by default.
  HRESULT TogglePasswordAutosaveEnabled([in] BOOL enable);

  /// Toggles whether autofill for information like names, street and email addresses, phone
  /// numbers, and arbitrary input is enabled. This excludes password and credit card
  /// information. Enabled by default. 
  HRESULT ToggleGeneralAutofillEnabled([in] BOOL enable);

  /// Erase the profile completely. All webviews on this profile will be closed and the profile
  /// directory on disk will be deleted.
  HRESULT Erase([in] ICoreWebView2ProfileEraseCompletedHandler *handler);
}
```

            m_mainWindow, options.Get(),
            Callback<ICoreWebView2CreateCoreWebView2ControllerCompletedHandler>(
                this, &AppWindow::OnCreateCoreWebView2ControllerCompleted)
                .Get()));
    }

    return S_OK;
}
```

## Access the profile property of WebView2

### Win32 C++

```cpp
HRESULT AppWindow::OnCreateCoreWebView2ControllerCompleted(HRESULT result, ICoreWebView2Controller* controller)
{
    // ...

    m_controller = controller;
    
    // Gets the webview object from controller.
    wil::com_ptr<ICoreWebView2> coreWebView2;
    CHECK_FAILURE(m_controller->get_CoreWebView2(&coreWebView2));

    auto webview7 = coreWebView2.try_query<ICoreWebView2_7>();
    if (webview7)
    {
        // Gets the profile property of webview.
        wil::com_ptr<ICoreWebView2Profile> profile;
        CHECK_FAILURE(webview7->get_Profile(&profile));

        // Accesses the profile object.
        wil::unique_cotaskmem_string name;
        CHECK_FAILURE(profile->get_ProfileName(&name));
        BOOL inPrivateModeEnabled = FALSE;
        CHECK_FAILURE(profile->get_IsInPrivateModeEnabled(&inPrivateModeEnabled));

>         wil::unique_cotaskmem_string profile_path;

Reviewer: No need to get profile path which isn't used.

Author: Actually we're displaying the profile path (only the last folder name, not full path) but not the profile name :)

The |m_profileName| is a little bit confusing, renamed it to |m_profileDirName|. Then removed  `profile->get_ProfileName()` which is not used here.

        CHECK_FAILURE(profile->get_ProfilePath(&profile_path));
        std::wstring str(profile_path.get());
        m_profileName = str.substr(str.find_last_of(L'\\') + 1);
        

>         // update window title

Reviewer: May want to mention in the comment that it uses m_profileName
```suggestion
        // update window title with m_profileName
```
